New framing section for Chapter 16 (#848)
browserengineering/book: book/invalidation.md

[editing-hates-you]: https://lord.io/text-editing-hates-you-too/

Why Invalidation?
=================

Fundamentally, the reason editing this page is slow in our browser is

> that this page is pretty big.[^other-reasons] After all, it's not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is pretty big.[^other-reasons] After all, it's not
```

Author: I did something different but I think still avoids the duplication.

handling the keypress that's slow---that just appends a character to a
`Text` node, which takes almost no time. It's what happens afterwards

> that takes time: the browser has to rerender the whole page. Even tiny

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that takes time: the browser has to rerender the whole page. Even seemingly tiny
```

changes take a long time on a large page.

[^other-reasons]: I'm sure there are all sorts of performance
    improvements possible without implementing the invalidation
    techniques from this chapter, but they are essential toward
    achieving incrementalism, which is a kind of asymptotic guarantee
    that simple optimizations won't achieve.

If we want interactions to be fast, even on large, complex pages,

> we're going to need re-rendering the page to take time *proportional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we're going to need re-rendering the page to take time proportional
```

> to the size of the change*, not proportional to the size of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the *size of the change*, and *not* proportional to the size of the page.
```

> This property is sometimes called *incrementality*, and it really

Reviewer: I don't think I have heard this name, maybe it's a thing in other communities?
Anyway, I think we can coin it and call it the *principle of incremental performance.*

Here would be a good place to explain why this is important:
for developers, so that they can predict the performance
of the web pages they create, and important for users, so they can predict the
performance of interactions (typing: fast; loading a new page: relatively slow).
We can then follow up with commentary about how
the inversion-of-control/constraint programming model of HTML and CSS makes it
hard to achieve this principle, and this chapter is all about how to do so.

Author: Great name!

constrains our browser. For example, incrementality means that during
rendering, we can't even *traverse* the whole page, since that would
take time proportional to the whole page, not the change being made.

Now, note that when the page is first loaded, rendering is definitely
going to take time proportional to the size of the page. So to achieve
incrementality, we're going to need to think of the initial render and
later re-renders differently. The initial render will create a cache

> that later renders invalidate and recompute parts of.[^big-change] If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that later renders invalidates and recompute parts of.[^big-change] If
```

we're only invalidate a small part each time, this will only take time

> proportional to the changed portion of the page.

Reviewer: This sentence feels like it's repeating earlier ones.

[^big-change]: While initial and later renders are conceptually
    different, they'll use the same code path. Basically, the initial
    render will be one big change from no page to the initial page,
    while later re-renders will incorporate smaller changes.

In a real browser, every step of the rendering pipeline needs to be
incremental, but this chapter focuses on layout. Layout is important
and makes a good illustration of the idea. Incrementalizing layout
means skipping the two most expensive parts of layout: building the
layout tree and traversing it to compute layout fields. Ultimately,
re-layouts will take under a millisecond when typing on this page.

> Getting there is going to be a bit of a rocky road, though. The whole

Reviewer: Instead of stating generalities about the hard work to come, being more explicit about it?

Something like:

"We'll have to proceed with the following tasks:
* Make a detailed *dependency graph* of what depends on what, down to the level of every
value (`width`, `height`, `y`, etc) on every layout object.
* Use that graph to determine what to recompute when something changes.

idea is to only recompute what needs to be recomputed---but to know if
something needs to be recomputed, we'll need to know if it depends on
something that's changed. So the key will be tracking dependencies.
Our `needs_style` and `needs_layout` flags already involve a bit of
simple dependency reasoning, but to achieve incrementality we'll need
to track much finer-grained dependencies, which means we'll need to
track way, way more of them.

So in fact most of this chapter is devoted to tracking dependencies,
and the abstractions we can use to help us do it. We'll need to
execute several large refactors of our layout engine, and only at the
end will we see substantially faster layout. But the complexity is
worth it---for the end user, to get a much more responsive browser,
and for you, to see how real browsers make interactive pages fast.

::: {.further}

> Implementing incremental layout is complex, but it's a core part of

Reviewer: This could be rephrased to refer back to the "principle of incremental performance", and focus
on why it's important for browsers to provide this as a core value proposition to developers and users.
(Above I'm suggesting that we focus on the *fact* that we'll be focusing on that, but here we can talk about
why -- having to do with the role of a platform provider in a layered platform: platform engineer vs web developer vs user.

[editing-hates-you]: https://lord.io/text-editing-hates-you-too/

Why Invalidation?
=================

Fundamentally, the reason editing this page is slow in our browser is
that it's pretty big.[^other-reasons] After all, it's not handling the
keypress that's slow---that just appends a character to a `Text` node,
which takes almost no time. It's what happens afterwards that takes

> time: the browser has to rerender the whole page. Even seemlingly tiny

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time: the browser has to rerender the whole page. Even seemingly tiny
```

changes take a long time on a large page.

[^other-reasons]: I'm sure there are all sorts of performance
    improvements possible without implementing the invalidation
    techniques from this chapter, but they are essential toward
    achieving incrementalism, which is a kind of asymptotic guarantee
    that simple optimizations won't achieve.

If we want interactions to be fast, even on large, complex pages,
we're going to need re-rendering the page to take time proportional to
the *size of the change*, and not proportional to the *size of the
page*. I call this the principle of incremental performance, and it's
crucial for handling large and complex web applications. It means that
developers can predict how long their code will run regardless of the
content on the page, and it lets users predict how long interactions
will take. That ultimately makes this principle a core part of the
value that browser engineers provide to the web as a whole.

But the principle of incremental performance also really constrains
our browser. For example, during rendering even *traversing* the whole

> page would take time proportional to the whole page, not the change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout tree would take time proportional to the whole page, not the change
```

differently.[^big-change] When the page is first loaded, rendering is
definitely going to take time proportional to the size of the page.
But we treat that initial render as a cache. Later renders will only
invalidate and recompute the parts of that cache, taking time
proportional to the changed portion of the page.

[^big-change]: While initial and later renders are conceptually
    different, they'll use the same code path. Basically, the initial
    render will be one big change from no page to the initial page,
    while later re-renders will incorporate smaller changes.

The key to that will be tracking the effects of changes. When one
part of the page, like a `style` attribute, changes, other things
that depends on it, like that element's size, change as well. So we'll
need to construct a detailed *dependency graph*, down to the level of
each layout field, and use that graph to determine what to recompute.
It will be similar to our `needs_style` and `needs_layout` flags, but
at a much larger scale.

In a real browser, every step of the rendering pipeline needs to be
incremental, but this chapter focuses on layout.[^why-layout] Most of

> the chapter is about tracking dependencies, and building abstractions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this chapter is about tracking dependencies in the dependency graph, and building abstractions
```

to help us do that. To use those abstractions, we'll need to execute a
large refactor of our layout engine. But ultimately, incrementalizing
layout will allow us to skip the two most expensive parts of layout:
building the layout tree and traversing it to compute layout fields.

> Re-layout for this page will take under a millisecond.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we're done re-layout for this page will take under a millisecond when making small changes,
no matter how large the page!
```

> [^why-layout]: Layout is important and also complex enough to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^why-layout]: Why, you might ask? Because layout is complex enough to
```

    demonstrate most of the core challenges and techniques.

::: {.further}
The principle of incremental performance derives from the principles
of the web. Remember that the web is a *declarative* platform: web
pages only concern themselves with *describing* how the page looks,
and it's up to the browser to implement that description. To us
browser engineers, that creates a whole bunch of complexity. But think
about the web as a whole---it involves not just browser engineers, but
web developers and users as well. Implementing complex invalidation

> algorithms in the browser lets web developers make more interesting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
algorithms in the browser lets web developers focus on making more interesting
```
